---
layout: post
title: 3 Reasons Gravity is an Outlier
categories: []
tags: []
status: publish
type: post
published: true
keywords: "d3.js, d3 box, d3 nodes, gravity, cuaron, bullock, women, small cast, rotten tomatoes, 3d"
meta:
  _edit_last: '2'
---

<script src="/javascripts/d3.v3.js"></script>
<script src="/javascripts/box.js"></script>
<script src="/javascripts/revised_box.js"></script>
<script src="/javascripts/gravity_3d.js"></script>
<script src="/javascripts/gravity_nodes.js"></script>

Alonso Cuaron's ***Gravity*** has been the most successful movie of the fall and one of the most buzzed about films all year. What's most impressive about this movie is not its success, but a combination of unlikely factors that have audiences and critics thrilled.

###First Factor: There's a Girl in Space?!

In a recent [article at **The Verge**](http://www.theverge.com/2013/7/21/4542974/gravity-director-alfonso-cuaron-defends-casting-sandra-bullock-female-lead-sci-fi), Adrianne Jeffries writes an excellent column about Cuaron having to defend Bullock as the lead.

<h2><!--more--></h2>

In it, she quotes Cuaron saying at Comic-Con:

>When I finished the script, there were voices that were saying, 'well, we should change it to a male lead.' Obviously they were not powerful enough voices, because we got away with it. But the sad thing is that there is still that tendency.

It shouldn't be a national storyline that one of the current top filmmakers chose one of the world's top actresses to lead their movie. Bullock has made a career as a leading performer, so why is this such a big deal?

There is a common misconception in Hollywood that audiences don't want to see female performances in blockbuster, action-packed movies. As [Melissa Silverstein points out elsewhere](http://www.forbes.com/sites/melissasilverstein/2013/10/04/gravity-a-step-forward-for-women-onscreen/), only one female-led movie, ***The Heat***, opened in over 3000 screens this summer. Yet ***Gravity*** has packed theaters the past two weekends to watch Sandra Bullock overcome near-death obstacles and deliver an adrenaline-packed adventure. A large majority of the film has just Bullock's face and voice guiding us through the experience, with no mention of boyfriend-problems or the need for buying shoes.

My question: Has Hollywood improved over time? What percentage of women make up a cast for a typical movie in 2010s compared to 1950s?

Using some data from IMDB, we can look at the cast-equality over time. This is a simple percentage of how many females were in the cast of a movie.

<div id="ratios" class="graph"></div>

We can see that there has been some improvement. The cast-equality has improved slightly since the 40s and 50s, but only by a small bit. In 1950s, a typical movie only had 23% of its cast as females, where today we can expect around 32%.

In 1950s, only 4.4% of movies had a female-majority in their cast. This has improved to 10.4% today.

But what about for specific genres? Cuaron has been called brave for choosing Bullock as the lead for a Sci-Fi movie (even though sci-fi has had a fairly good track record of strong leading women). Let's look at the average cast-equality by genres:

<div id="genres_ratios" class="graph"></div>

Sci-Fi has the 6th best cast-equality compared to the other genres. Musicals and Romance have the best median values of 38% for their cast-equality, and War and Westerns coming in last.

***Gravity*** will add fuel to the conversation that Hollywood can do a better job at this. Audiences are interested in strong female roles that can solve tough problems and overcome obstacles (that don't have to involve a breakup).

###Second Factor: Spaceship for Two

One of the most interesting angles to ***Gravity*** is how small the cast is. ***Gravity*** has two roles, Clooney's and Bullock's (and yes, I'm discounting the two voices and semi-face you see at one point).

One of the pressing feelings of ***Gravity*** is overwhelming loneliness. Our heroes are trapped in an immense space with little hope of anyone else appearing. Characters spend lots of their time away from everyone else, with just their voice and breath guiding us through their survival. Cuaron seals this fact by not cutting  to earth to show us the mission control or by giving us flashbacks to previous moments in their lives. The entire film keeps with the perspective of these two characters and leaves you strapped to a tiny rope attached to their waist.

This is not something that Hollywood does well. We don't get restraint, we get explosions. Supporting roles are sprinkled throughout a film with little rhyme or reason to their existence. Is it really necessary for the baseball movie ***42*** to have 190 characters in it? This is enough to field 20+ baseball teams! Or does ***Grown Ups 2*** need a larger accredited cast than ***World War Z***? Is it possible for Adam Sandler's posse to be larger than the zombie apocalypse?

Below we have a graph of the top 100 grossing films of 2013 so far based off their cast size (hover to get more information). The average size of cast this year is 75 people. ***Gravity's*** small cast of two is by far the smallest, with ***The Croods*** coming in second with eight.

<div id="movies_2013" class="graph"></div>

The fact that ***Gravity*** has been able to make this list with such a small cast gives credence to its talent. Now if only we could unleash the zombie apocalypse on the Grown Ups posse...


###Third Factor: Do these Glasses Make Me Look Hypocritical?

The third reason to see ***Gravity*** is to experience the humility that Mr. Cuaron delivers.

You see, if you are like me, you've written off 3D movies years ago. After you got over ***Avatar*** and you got burnt out on the 18th Pixar movie to be re-released, you turned into a 3D cynic. You snarl at billboards that advertise it. You mock the movie studios that are out for an extra $4 a ticket. You abandon friends that tell you it really makes a difference.

But here's the thing…it really does make a difference.

***Gravity*** was by far the most incredible 3D movie experience I've seen to date. Cuaron uses the technology, not in a "Ohh crap somethings coming at my face" but in a "Ohh crap I'm really far from that place I want to be".

Thankfully, I don't believe I'll have to turn in my 3D Critics Society membership anytime soon. Most of Cuaron's time (and budget) went to creating the technology and experience to make 3D truly work for this movie. I'm not sure many directors and studios are willing to make that investment for Men in Black 4 (fingers crossed though).

Let's look at the Rotten Tomatoes Score for movies released in 3D.

<div id="top_3d_movies" class="graph"></div>

Compared to the other movies released in 3D, ***Gravity*** has the third highest Rotten Tomatoes score and the highest non-animated.  Most of the top ten are either franchise or animated movies where 3D was slapped on as an after-effect. Only ***Life of Pi*** stands out as another, contentious effort to blend 3D as an effective visual medium.

##Conclusion

***Gravity*** is a must-watch movie of the fall. Sure, this is an exciting movie that will leave you checking your vitals hours later, but its also one that is daring to go against the grain of normalcy. This is a must see because of the exceptional woman lead, the impressive use of a small cast, and the revolutionary use of 3D. Every year, we pack into theaters to see stories of heroes and be shown images we've never seen before. Celebrating a movie like ***Gravity*** will hopefully open up the doors to even more creative and daring movies that stretch our minds (and joyfully empty our wallets).

<script type="text/javascript">
  function generate_decades_ratio_chart(){
    var ratio_chart = d3.percent_box().whiskers(iqr(1.5)).width(15).height(445);
    d3.json("/data/gravity/revised_data.json", function(error, json) {
      var data =json, ratios = [], decades = [];
      for(var propt in data){
        ratios.push(data[propt]["ratios"])
        decades.push(propt);
      };
      ratio_chart.domain([0,1]);

      var yScale = d3.scale.linear().domain([0,1]).range([460, 10]);
      var formatter = d3.format("%");
      var yAxis = d3.svg.axis().scale(yScale).orient("left").ticks(5).tickFormat(formatter);
          
      var ratio_svg = d3.select("div#ratios").selectAll("svg")
        .data(ratios)
        .enter().append("svg")
        .attr("class", "box")
        .attr("width", 104)
        .attr("height", 500)
        .append("g")
        .attr("transform", "translate(65,10)")
        .call(ratio_chart);
        
      var box_label = d3.select("div#ratios").selectAll("g")
        .data(decades).append("text").attr("x",function(d){return -20;})
        .attr("y",function(d){return 470;})
        .text( function (d) { return d; })
        .attr("font-family","sans-serif").attr("font-size", "20px");

      d3.select("div#ratios").select("g")
        .append("g").attr("class", "axis")
        .attr("transform", "translate(-27,-12)")
        .call(yAxis);
    });
  };

  function generate_genre_ratios_chart(){
    var genre_chart = d3.percent_box().whiskers(iqr(1.5)).width(21).height(445);

    d3.json("/data/gravity/genres.json", function(error, json){
      var data = json, ratios = [], genres = [];
      for(var propt in data){
        ratios.push(data[propt]["ratios"]);
        genres.push(propt);
      }
      genre_chart.domain([0,.8]);

      var genre_svg = d3.select("div#genres_ratios").selectAll("svg")
          .data(ratios).enter().append("svg")
          .attr("class", "box")
          .attr("width", 110)
          .attr("height", 500)
          .append("g").attr("transform", "translate(62,10)")
          .call(genre_chart);

      var box_label = d3.select("div#genres_ratios").selectAll("g")
          .data(genres).append("text")
          .attr("x",function(d){return 15;}).attr("y",function(d){return 470;})
          .text( function (d) { return d; })
          .attr("font-family","sans-serif").attr("font-size", "14px").attr("text-anchor", "middle");
                      
      var yScale = d3.scale.linear().domain([0,1]).range([460, 10]);
      var formatter = d3.format("%");
      var yAxis = d3.svg.axis().scale(yScale).orient("left").ticks(5).tickFormat(formatter);
      d3.select("div#genres_ratios").select("g")
        .append("g").attr("class", "axis")
        .attr("transform", "translate(-27,-12)")
        .call(yAxis);
    });
  }        
  function iqr(k) {
    return function(d, i) {
      var q1 = d.quartiles[0],
          q3 = d.quartiles[2],
          iqr = (q3 - q1) * k,
          i = -1,
          j = d.length;
      while (d[++i] < q1 - iqr);
      while (d[--j] > q3 + iqr);
      return [i, j];
    };
  }
  
  generate_decades_ratio_chart();
  generate_genre_ratios_chart();
  d3.create_circle_graph();
  d3.create_donut_graph();
</script>